.TH DVISELECT 1
.SH NAME
dviselect \- extract pages from DVI files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dviselect
[
.B \-s
] [
.B \-i
.I infile
] [
.B \-o
.I outfile
]
.I "list of pages"
[
.I infile
[
.I outfile
] ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dviselect
selects pages from a DVI file produced by TeX, creating a new DVI
file usable by any of TeX's conversion program, or even
by dviselect itself.
.PP
A
.I range
is a string of the form
.I first:last
where both
.I first
and
.I last
are optional numeric strings, with negative numbers indicated by
a leading underscore character ``_''.  If both
.I first
and
.I last
are omitted, the colon may also be omitted, or may be replaced
with an asterisk ``*''.  A
.I page range
is a list of ranges separated by periods.  A
.I "list of pages"
is described by a set of page ranges separated by commas and/or white space.
.PP
.I Dviselect
actually looks at the ten
.I count
variables that TeX writes; the first of these (\ecount0) is the
page number, with \ecount1 through \ecount9 having varied uses
depending on which macro packages are in use.  (Typically \ecount1
is a chapter or section number.)  A page is included in
.IR dviselect 's
output if all its \ecount values are within any one of the ranges
listed on the command line.  For example, the command
``dviselect *.1,35:''
might select everything in chapter 1, as well as pages 35 and up.
``dviselect 10:30'' would select pages 10 through 30 (inclusive).
``:43'' means everything up to and including page 43 (including
negative-numbered pages).
If a Table of Contents has negative page numbers, ``:_1'' will select it.
``*.4 .........1'' might
mean everything in every chapter 4 and an index, presuming \ecount9
was set to 1 in the index.  (``*'' must be quoted from the shell;
the null string is more convenient to use, if harder to read.)
.PP
Instead of \ecount values,
.I dviselect
can also select by ``absolute page number'', where the first page
is page 1, the second page 2, and so forth.  Absolute page numbers
are indicated by a leading equal sign ``=''.  Ranges of absolute
pages are also allowed: ``dviselect =3:7'' will extract the third
through seventh pages.  Dot separators are not legal in absolute
ranges, and there are no negative absolute page numbers.
.PP
More precisely, an asterisk or a null string implies no limit;
an equal sign means absolute pages rather than \ecounts;
a leading colon means everything up to and including the given page; a
trailing colon means everything from the given page on; and
a period indicates that the next \ecount should be examined.
If fewer than 10 ranges are specified, the remaining \ecounts
are left unrestricted (that is, ``1:5'' and ``1:5.*'' are equivalent).
A single number \fIn\fP is treated as if it were the range \fIn:n\fP.
An arbitrary number of page selectors may be given, separated by commas
or whitespace; a page is selected if any of the selectors matches
its \ecounts or absolute page number.
.PP
Dviselect normally prints the page numbers of the pages selected; the
.I \-s
option suppresses this.
.SH AUTHOR
Chris Torek, University of Maryland
.SH "SEE ALSO"
dvipr(1), iptex(1), tex(1), \fIThe TeXbook\fP
.SH BUGS
A leading ``-'' ought to be allowed for negative numbers, but it
is currently used as a synonym for ``:'', for backwards compatibility.
.PP
Section or subsection selection will sometimes fail, for the DVI
file lists only the \ecount values that were active when the page
ended.  Clever macro packages can alleviate this by making use of
other ``free'' \ecount registers.  Chapters normally begin on new
pages, and do not suffer from this particular problem.
.PP
.I Dviselect
does not adjust the parameters in the postamble; however, since these
values are normally used only to size certain structures in the output
conversion programs, and the parameters never need to be adjusted upward,
this has not proven to be a problem.
