.TH CEC 3
.SH NAME
cec \- coraid ethernet console server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B bind #© /dev

.B /dev/ceccfg
.B /dev/cecctl
.B /dev/cecdbg
.B /dev/cecstat
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
Cec exports a machines console over
raw ethernet frames.  See
.IR cec (1)
for a client.
.PP
The read-only file
.B ceccfg
lists the interfaces on which
.I cec
is configured, one per line.
.PP
The write-only
.B cecctl
accepts control messages.  The command
.IP
.B cecon
.I ethern
.PP
turns on a cec listener for
.IR ethern ,
while
.IP
.B cecoff 
.I ethern
.PP
turns that listener off.
The command
.IP
.BI name string
.PP
sets the name of the current machine name to
.I string
while
.IP
.B shelf 
.I n
.PP
sets the shelf number in
.B Toffer
messages.  The default
.I name
is the empty string and the default shelf number is -1.
These parameters are listed in the available servers
presented by
.IR cec(1).
The command
.IP
.B password
.I string
.PP
sets the connection password.  The cec protocol transmits
passwords in the clear. This is not real security.
The strings
.B traceon
and
.B traceoff
control cec tracing.
.PP
Debugging output is available in the read-only file
.BR cecdbg .
.PP
The file
.B cecstat
lists each connection in the following format
.IP
.EX
000e0c06a37c  25 open              0 0 0 00000000
.EE
.PP
The 7 fields are 
ethernet mac address,
the connection number,
the connection state (
.IR unused ,
.IR initb ,
.IR login ,
.IR open ),
the number of idle ticks,
the number of retires and the address of the current
outstanding message's
.BR Block* .
Fields 4-7 are likely to change in the future.
.SH EXAMPLE
Start cec on ports with no ip stack.
.IP
.EX
bind -a '#©' /dev
for(i in `{seq 1 10}){
	if(test -e '#l'^$i)
	if(! test -e /net*/ether^$i)
		echo 'cecon #l'^$i>/dev/cecctl
}
.EE
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR cec (1),
.\" .IR cec (6),
.\" .IR cec (4).
.SH SOURCE
.B /sys/src/9/port/devcec.c
.SH BUGS
Cec is not available before ethernet has started or
from 9load.
.PP
The
.B cecstat
format is neither fixed-width nor are fields 4-7 very useful.
