		ALADDIN GHOSTSCRIPT FREE PUBLIC LICENSE
			(Version 3, December 16, 1994)


	NOTE: This license is not the same as any of the GNU Licenses
	published by the Free Software Foundation.  Its terms are
	substantially different from those of the GNU Licenses.
	If you are familiar with the GNU Licenses, please read this
	license with extra care.

This License applies to the computer program known as "Aladdin
Ghostscript."  The "Program", below, refers to such program, and a "work
based on the Program" means either the Program or any derivative work of
the Program, as defined in the United States Copyright Act of 1976, such as
a translation or a modification.  Please note that Aladdin Ghostscript is
neither the program known as "GNU Ghostscript" nor the version of
Ghostscript available for commercial licensing from Artifex Software Inc.
The Program is a copyrighted work whose copyright is held by Aladdin
Enterprises (the "Licensor").

BY MODIFYING OR DISTRIBUTING THE PROGRAM (OR ANY WORK BASED ON THE
PROGRAM), YOU INDICATE YOUR ACCEPTANCE OF THIS LICENSE TO DO SO, AND ALL
ITS TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTING OR MODIFYING THE PROGRAM
OR WORKS BASED ON IT.  NOTHING OTHER THAN THIS LICENSE GRANTS YOU
PERMISSION TO MODIFY OR DISTRIBUTE THE PROGRAM OR ITS DERIVATIVE WORKS.
THESE ACTIONS ARE PROHIBITED BY LAW.  IF YOU DO NOT ACCEPT THESE TERMS AND
CONDITIONS, DO NOT MODIFY OR DISTRIBUTE THE PROGRAM.

1.  Licenses.

Licensor hereby grants you the following rights, provided that you comply
with all of the restrictions set forth in this License and provided,
further, that you distribute an unmodified copy of this License with the
Program:

(a) You may copy and distribute literal (i.e., verbatim) copies of the
Program's source code as you receive it throughout the world, in any
medium.

(b) You may modify the Program, create works based on the Program and
distribute copies of such throughout the world, in any medium. 

2.  Restrictions.

This license is subject to the following restrictions:

(a) Distribution of the Program or any work based on the Program by a
commercial organization to any third party is prohibited if any payment is
made in connection with such distribution, whether directly (as in payment
for a copy of the Program) or indirectly (as in payment for some service
related to the Program, or payment for some product or service that
includes a copy of the Program "without charge"; these are only examples,
and not an exhaustive enumeration of prohibited activities).  However, the
following methods of distribution involving payment shall not in and of
themselves be a violation of this restriction:

	(i) Posting the Program on a public access information storage and
retrieval service for which a fee is received for retrieving information
(such as an on-line service), provided that the fee is not
content-dependent (i.e., the fee would be the same for retrieving the same
volume of information consisting of random data).

	(ii) Distributing the Program on a CD-ROM, provided that the files
containing the Program are reproduced entirely and verbatim on such
CD-ROM, and provided further that all information on such CD-ROM be
redistributable for non-commercial purposes without charge.

(b) Activities other than copying, distribution and modification of the
Program are not subject to this License and they are outside its scope.
Functional use (running) of the Program is not restricted, and any output
produced through the use of the Program is subject to this license only if
its contents constitute a work based on the Program (independent of having
been made by running the Program).

(c) You must meet all of the following conditions with respect to the
distribution of any work based on the Program:

	(i) If you have modified the Program, you must cause your work to
carry prominent notices stating that you have modified the Program's files
and the date of any change;

	(ii) You must cause any work that you distribute or publish, that
in whole or in part contains or is derived from the Program or any part
thereof, to be licensed as a whole and at no charge to all third parties
under the terms of this License;

	(iii) If the modified program normally reads commands
interactively when run, you must cause it, at each time the modified
program commences operation, to print or display an announcement including
an appropriate copyright notice and a notice that there is no warranty (or
else, saying that you provide a warranty).  Such notice must also state
that users may redistribute the Program only under the conditions of this
License and tell the user how to view the copy of this License included
with the Program.  (Exception: if the Program itself is interactive but
does not normally print such an announcement, your work based on the
Program is not required to print an announcement.);

	(iv) You must accompany any such work based on the Program with
the complete corresponding machine-readable source code, delivered on a
medium customarily used for software interchange.  The source code for a
work means the preferred form of the work for making modifications to it.
For an executable work, complete source code means all the source code for
all modules it contains, plus any associated interface definition files,
plus the scripts used to control compilation and installation of the
executable code.  However, the source code distributed need not include
anything that is normally distributed (in either source or binary form)
with the major components (compiler, kernel, and so on) of the operating
system on which the executable runs, unless that component itself
accompanies the executable code;

	(v) If you distribute any written or printed material at all with
the Program or any work based on the Program, such material must include
either a written copy of this License, or a prominent written indication
that the Program or the work based on the Program is covered by this
License and written instructions for printing and/or displaying the copy of
the License on the distribution medium;

	(vi) You may not impose any further restrictions on the recipient's
exercise of the rights granted herein.

If distribution of executable or object code is made by offering the
equivalent ability to copy from a designated place, then offering
equivalent ability to copy the source code from the same place counts as
distribution of the source code, even though third parties are not
compelled to copy the source code along with the object code.

3.	Reservation of Rights.

No rights are granted to the Program except as expressly set forth herein.
You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Program except as
expressly provided under this License.  Any attempt otherwise to copy,
modify, sublicense or distribute the Program is void, and will
automatically terminate your rights under this License.  However, parties
who have received copies, or rights, from you under this License will not
have their licenses terminated so long as such parties remain in full
compliance.

4.	Other Restrictions.

If the distribution and/or use of the Program is restricted in certain
countries for any reason, Licensor may add an explicit geographical
distribution limitation excluding those countries, so that distribution is
permitted only in or among countries not thus excluded.  In such case,
this License incorporates the limitation as if written in the body of this
License.

5.	Limitations.

THE PROGRAM IS PROVIDED TO YOU "AS IS," WITHOUT WARRANTY.  THERE IS NO
WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT OF THIRD PARTY RIGHTS.  THE ENTIRE
RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM IS WITH YOU.  SHOULD
THE PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY
SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.

IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN WRITING WILL
LICENSOR, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY MODIFY AND/OR REDISTRIBUTE THE
PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY
GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE
USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF
DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY YOU OR THIRD
PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER PROGRAMS),
EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
SUCH DAMAGES.

6.	General.  

This Agreement is governed by the laws of the State of California, U.S.A.,
excluding choice of law rules.

For government users, the Program is provided with RESTRICTED RIGHTS.
Use, duplication or disclosure by the Government is subject to
restrictions as set forth in subparagraph (c)(1)(ii) of The Rights in
Technical Data and Computer Software clause at DFARS 252.227-7013 or
subparagraphs (c)(1) and (2) of the Commercial Computer
Software-Restricted Rights 48 CFR 52.227-19, as appropriate.
