@ifclear version
@defcodeindex fl
@defcodeindex op
@end ifclear

@node unixtex.ftp
@section @file{unixtex.ftp}: Obtaining @TeX{}

@cindex obtaining @TeX{}
@cindex retrieving @TeX{}

@flindex unixtex.ftp
@flindex tug.org
@flindex www.tug.org
@flindex ftp.tug.org
This
@iftex
chapter
@end iftex
is @url{ftp://ftp.tug.org/tex/unixtex.ftp}, last updated 18 March 1998.
Also available as @url{http://www.tug.org/unixtex.ftp}.  The IP address
is currently @code{[158.121.106.10]}, and the canonical host name is
currently @samp{tug.org}.  It is also in Kpathsea source distributions
as @file{etc/unixtex.ftp} (although the network version is usually
newer).  Mail @email{kb@@mail.tug.org} with comments or questions.

Following are general instructions for Unix or other sites who wish to
acquire the Web2c distribution, (plain) @TeX{}, La@TeX{} (2e),
Bib@TeX{}, Metafont, MetaPost, DVI processors for the X window system,
PostScript, the PCL language in the HP LaserJet, and related programs.
They are oriented towards building from the original sources, though
some information on alternative packages is included in the last
section.  See also @url{http://www.tug.org/web2c}, the Web2c and
Kpathsea home page.

Please consider joining the @TeX{} Users Group (TUG) to help support the
maintenance and development of the programs you retrieve.  Email
@email{tug@@tug.org} or see @url{http://www.tug.org} for information and
a membership form.

For actual installation instructions after obtaining the necessary
sources, see @ref{Installation}.  A copy is in the distribution file
@file{kpathsea/INSTALL}.

@menu
* Electronic distribution::  CTAN and so forth.
* CD-ROM distribution::
* Tape distribution::
* Other TeX packages::
@end menu


@node Electronic distribution
@subsection Electronic distribution

@cindex ftp retrieval
@cindex obtaining Web2c by ftp
@cindex distributions, via ftp

@cindex CTAN, defined
@cindex backbone of CTAN
In many places we refer to @var{CTAN:}.  This is @emph{both} a host name
and a directory name.  Here are some primary locations:

@example
@url{ftp://ctan.tug.org/tex-archive}    @r{(California, USA)}
@url{ftp://ftp.dante.de/tex-archive}    @r{(Germany)}
@url{ftp://ftp.tex.ac.uk/tex-archive}   @r{(England)}
@end example

@noindent
@flindex README.mirrors
@flindex CTAN.sites
@cindex mirrors, FTP
CTAN has many mirrors worldwide; see the top-level file
@file{README.mirrors} from one of the sites above, or finger
@email{ctan@@ftp.tug.org}, or see @url{http://www.tug.org/CTAN.sites}.
A list current as of the time of distribution is in the top-level file
@file{./MIRROR}.

@cindex World Wide Web CTAN access
@cindex Gopher CTAN access
@cindex email CTAN access
@cindex NFS CTAN access
You can also access CTAN via the World Wide Web, Gopher, electronic
mail, or NFS.  The same @file{README.mirrors} file explains how.

@cindex binary mode, for file transfers
You will need to retrieve some or all of the following archives,
depending on your needs (don't forget to set binary mode for file
transfers):

@table @asis
@item @file{@var{CTAN:}/systems/web2c/texmflib.tar.gz}
A basic collection of fonts (TFM files only) and macro packages
(including Texinfo and La@TeX{} 2e).  It unpacks into @file{texmf/}; if
you change the structure of this hierarchy, you will also have to change
the default search paths (@pxref{Changing search paths}).  It is
required unless you already have these files, in which case you should
change the default paths as necessary to find them.  There are other
packages of library files, @file{etexlib.tar.gz},
@file{omegalib.tar.gz}, and @file{pdftexlib.tar.gz}, that are required
as well if you install e-@TeX{}, Omega, or pdf@TeX{} respectively.

@item @file{@var{CTAN:}/systems/web2c/web.tar.gz}
@cindex Knuth, Donald E., original author
The original WEB source files, written mostly by Don Knuth.  Required
unless you already have this @file{web} version.  (The WEB sources
change irregularly with respect to Web2c itself.)  Unpacks into
@file{web2c-@var{version}}.

@item @file{@var{CTAN:}/systems/web2c/web2c.tar.gz}
The Web2c system.  Required.  Also unpacks into
@file{web2c-@var{version}}.

@item @file{@var{CTAN:}/systems/web2c/web2c-etex.tar.gz}
Additions to the Web2c system for building e-@TeX{}.  Optional.  Also
unpacks into @file{web2c-@var{version}}.

@item @file{@var{CTAN:}/systems/web2c/web2c-omega.tar.gz}
Additions to the Web2c system for building Omega.  Optional.  Also
unpacks into @file{web2c-@var{version}}.

@item @file{@var{CTAN:}/systems/web2c/web2c-pdftex.tar.gz}
Additions to the Web2c system for building pdf@TeX{}.  Optional.  Also
unpacks into @file{web2c-@var{version}}.

@item @file{@var{CTAN:}/systems/web2c/texk.tar.gz}
The web and web2c sources, plus the additions for web2c, plus the dvi
drivers mentioned below, plus extra dvi drivers and tools not packaged
separately.  Recommended if you want to build a complete system.
Unpacks into @file{texk-@var{version}}.

@c @item @file{@var{CTAN:}/systems/web2c/psfonts.tar.gz}
@c Metrics, outlines, and bitmaps (for previewing) for the 35 de facto
@c standard fonts donated by URW and the additional high-quality freely
@c available PostScript fonts donated by Adobe, Bitstream, and URW,
@c including geometrically-created variants such as oblique and small
@c caps.  Unpacks into @file{texmf}.  Necessary for PostScript printing or
@c previewing support.

@item @file{@var{CTAN:}/dviware/dvipsk/dvipsk.tar.gz}
DVI-to-PostScript translator.  Unpacks into @file{dvipsk-@var{version}}.
Optional.

@item @file{@var{CTAN:}/dviware/xdvik/xdvik.tar.gz}
X window system DVI previewer.  Unpacks into @file{xdvik-@var{version}}.
Optional.

@item @file{@var{CTAN:}/dviware/dviljk/dviljk.tar.gz}
DVI-to-PCL (HP LaserJet) translator.  Unpacks into
@file{dviljk-@var{version}}.  Optional.
@end table

All that said, the originating host for the software above is
@file{ftp.tug.org}.  You can retrieve these distributions (but not much
else) from the @file{tex/} directory on that host.


@node CD-ROM distribution
@subsection CD-ROM distribution

@cindex CD-ROM distributions
@cindex obtaining Web2c on CD-ROM
@cindex distributions, on CD-ROM

Numerous organizations distribute various @TeX{} CD-ROM's:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@cindex @TeX{} Live CD-ROM
@cindex TUG
@cindex UKTUG
@cindex GUTenberg
TUG, UK TUG, and GUTenberg (French-speaking @TeX{} user group)
collaborated to produce the @cite{@TeX{} Live} CD-ROM, based on
te@TeX{}, which in turn is based on Web2c; email
@email{tex-live@@mail.tug.org} or see
@url{http://www.tug.org/tex-live.html}.

@item
@cindex Dante @TeX{} CD-ROM
@cindex German @TeX{} CD info
Dante (the German-speaking @TeX{} user group) has produced a CD-ROM.
See @url{http://www.dante.de/dante/DANTE-CTAN-CD-ROM.html}, and
@url{http://www.dante.de/tex-informationen/CD-ROMs.html} for
information about @TeX{} CD's in general.  Both are in German.

@item
@cindex Free Software Foundation
@cindex FSF Source Code CD-ROM
The Free Software Foundation's @cite{Source Code CD-ROM} contains the
minimal @TeX{} source distribution described in the previous section
(i.e., enough to print GNU documentation); email
@email{gnu@@prep.ai.mit.edu}.

@item
The Gateway@! CD-ROM set contains a runnable NetBSD/Amiga distribution
and sources; see @url{http://www.netbsd.org/Sites/cdroms.html}.

@item
The InfoMagic CD-ROM is a copy of CTAN (see previous section); see
@url{http://www.infomagic.com}.

@item
@cindex 4all@TeX{} Live CD-ROM
@cindex NTG
NTG (Dutch-speaking @TeX{} user group) produced the 4all@TeX{} CD-ROM;
email @email{ntg@@nic.surfnet.nl}, or see
@url{http://www.ntg.nl/4allcd/}.  This is a runnable system.

@item
@cindex Prime Time @TeX{}cetera CD-ROM
The Prime Time @TeX{}cetera CD-ROM is also a copy of CTAN; email
@email{ptf@@ctcl.com} or see @url{http://www.ptf.com/ptf/}.

@item
@cindex Walnut Creek @TeX{} CD-ROM
Walnut Creek's @TeX{} CD-ROM is also a copy of CTAN; email
@email{info@@cdrom.com} or see
@url{http://www.cdrom.com:/titles/tex.html}.

@item
@cindex Linux, using Web2c
Most Linux distributions include some @TeX{} package based on
Web2c; see the Linux documentation file @samp{Distribution-HOWTO} for a
comparison of Linux distributions, available (for example) via
@url{http://www.linux.org}.
@end itemize

If you know of additional @TeX{} CD-ROM distributions to add to this
list, please inform @email{kb@@mail.tug.org}.


@node Tape distribution
@subsection Tape distribution

@cindex tape distribution
@cindex obtaining @TeX{} on tape
@cindex distributions, on tape

@cindex Northwest Computing Support Center
@flindex unixtex@@u.washington.edu
@cindex support organization
You can obtain a complete @TeX{} distribution, including Web2c, on tape.
Contact:
@display
Pierre MacKay / Denny Hall, Mail Stop DH-10 / Department of Classics
University of Washington / Seattle, WA 98195 / USA
phone: 206-543-2268; email: @email{unixtex@@u.washington.edu}
@end display

At this writing, the distribution is available in @code{tar} format on
1/4 inch 4-track QIC-24 cartridges and 4@dmn{mm} DAT cartridges, and the
cost is US$210.  Make checks payable to the University of Washington,
drawn on a U.S. bank.  Purchase orders are acceptable, but they carry an
extra charge of $10 to pay for invoice processing.  Overseas sites,
please add $20 for shipment via air parcel post, or $30 for shipment via
courier.


@node Other TeX packages
@subsection Other @TeX{} packages

@cindex other @TeX{} distributions
@cindex @TeX{} distributions besides Web2c

@cindex Amiga @TeX{} implementations
@cindex Acorn @TeX{} implementations
@cindex VMS @TeX{} implementations
@cindex Macintosh @TeX{} implementations
@cindex DOS @TeX{} implementations
@cindex Windows @TeX{} implementations
Many other @TeX{} implementations are available in
@file{@var{CTAN:}/systems}, including ready-to-run distributions for
Unix, Amiga, Acorn, VMS, Macintosh, DOS, and Windows (in various forms).
Although Web2c has support in the source code for many operating
systems, and in fact some of the other distributions are based on it,
it's unlikely to work as distributed on anything but Unix.  (Please
contribute improvements!)

@cindex te@TeX{}
@cindex precompiled Unix binaries
The Unix distribution alluded to above is the te@TeX{} distribution.
This includes both complete sources and precompiled binaries for many
popular Unix variants, including Linux. It is based on Web2c, and
contains many other @TeX{}-related programs as well.

@flindex labrea.stanford.edu
@cindex Knuth, Donald E., archive of programs by
The host @t{labrea.stanford.edu} is the original source for the files
for which Donald Knuth is directly responsible: @file{tex.web},
@file{plain.tex}, etc. However, unless you want to build your @TeX{}
library tree ab initio, it is more reliable and less work to retrieve
these files as part of the above packages. In any case, @t{labrea} is
not the canonical source for anything except what was created by
Stanford @TeX{} project, so do not rely on all the files available at
that ftp site being up-to-date.
