@ifclear version
@defcodeindex cm
@defcodeindex fl
@defcodeindex op
@end ifclear

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

@cindex configuration
@cindex compilation
@cindex installation

@ifset version
(A copy of this chapter is in the distribution file @file{web2c/INSTALL}.)
@end ifset

Installing Web2c is mostly the same as installing any other
Kpathsea-using program.  Therefore, for the basic steps involved,
see @ref{Installation,,, kpathsea, Kpathsea}.  (A copy is in the file
@file{kpathsea/INSTALL}.)

One peculiarity to Web2c is that the source distribution comes in two
files: @file{web.tar.gz} and @file{web2c.tar.gz}.  You must retrieve and
unpack them both.  (We have two because the former archive contains the
very large and seldom-changing original WEB source files.)
@xref{unixtex.ftp,,, kpathsea, Kpathsea}.

@pindex mpost@r{, reason for name change}
Another peculiarity is the MetaPost program.  Although it has been
installed previously as @code{mp}, as of Web2c 7.0 the installed name is
now @code{mpost}, to avoid conflict with the @code{mp} program that does
prettyprinting.  This approach was recommended by the MetaPost author,
John Hobby.  If you as the @TeX{} administrator wish to make it
available under its shorter name as well, you will have to set up a link
or some such yourself.  And of course individual users can do the same.

For solutions to common installation problems and information on how to
report a bug, see the file @file{kpathsea/BUGS} (@pxref{Bugs,,,
kpathsea, Kpathsea}).  See also the Web2c home page,
@url{http://www.tug.org/web2c}.

Points worth repeating:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@cindex directory structure
@cindex basic fonts and macros
@cindex fonts, basic
@cindex macros, basic
Before starting the standard compilation and installation you must
install the basic fonts, macros, and other library files.
@xref{Installation,,,kpathsea, Kpathsea}.

@item
If you do not wish to use the standard file locations, see @ref{Changing
search paths,,, kpathsea, Kpathsea}.

@item
Some Web2c features are enabled or disabled at @code{configure} time,
as described in the first section below.

@end itemize

@menu
* configure options::           Especially --with and --enable.
* Compile-time options::        Unusual -D's.
* Additional targets::		Breaking down the task.
* Triptrap::                    Running the torture tests.
* Runtime options::             Array sizes and the like.
@end menu


@node configure options
@section @code{configure} options

@cindex configuration, compile-time
@cindex compile-time options
@pindex configure --with/--enable @r{options}
This section gives pointers to descriptions of the @samp{--with} and
@samp{--enable} @code{configure} arguments that Web2c accepts.  Some are
specific to Web2c, others are generic to all Kpathsea-using programs.

For a list of all the options @code{configure} accepts, run
@samp{configure --help}.  The generic options are listed first, and the
package-specific options come last.

For a description of the generic options (which mainly allow you to
specify installation directories) and basic @code{configure} usage,
see @ref{Invoking configure,, Running @code{configure} scripts, autoconf,
Autoconf}, a copy is in the file @file{kpathsea/CONFIGURE}.

@table @samp
@item --disable-dump-share
Do not make fmt/base/mem files sharable across different endian
architectures.  @xref{Hardware and memory dumps}.

@item --without-maketexmf-default
@itemx --without-maketexpk-default
@itemx --without-maketextfm-default
@itemx --with-maketextex-default
Enable or disable the dynamic generation programs.  @xref{mktex
configuration,,, kpathsea, Kpathsea}.  The defaults are the inverse of
the options, i.e., everything is enabled except @code{mktextex}.

@item --enable-auto-core
Dump @file{core} if the input file is
@file{HackyInputFileNameForCoreDump.tex}.  @xref{Preloaded executables}.

@item --enable-shared
Build Kpathsea as a shared library.  @xref{Shared library,,, kpathsea,
Kpathsea}.

@item --with-editor=@var{cmd}
Change the default editor invoked by the @samp{e} interactive command.
@xref{Editor invocation}.

@item --with-epsfwin
@itemx --with-hp2627win
@itemx --with-mftalkwin
@itemx --with-nextwin
@itemx --with-regiswin
@itemx --with-suntoolswin
@itemx --with-tektronixwin
@itemx --with-unitermwin
@itemx --with-x
@itemx --with-x-toolkit=KIT
@itemx --with-x11win
@itemx --with-x11
Define Metafont graphics support; by default, no graphics support is
enabled.  @xref{Online Metafont graphics}.

@item --x-includes=@var{dir}
@itemx --x-libraries=@var{dir}
Define the locations of the X11 include files and libraries; by default,
@code{configure} does its best to guess).  @xref{Optional Features,,,
autoconf, Autoconf}.  A copy is in @file{kpathsea/CONFIGURE}.
@end table


@node Compile-time options
@section Compile-time options

@cindex compile-time options
@cindex @samp{#define} options
@opindex -D @r{compiler options}
In addition to the @code{configure} options listed in the previous
section, there are a few things that can be affected at compile-time
with C definitions, rather than with @code{configure}.  Using any of
these is unusual.

To specify extra compiler flags (@samp{-D@var{name}} in this case), the
simplest thing to do is:
@example
make XCFLAGS="@var{ccoptions}"
@end example
@noindent You can also set the @code{CFLAGS} environment variable before
running @code{configure}.  @xref{configure environment,,, kpathsea, Kpathsea}.

Anyway, here are the possibilities:

@table @samp
@item -DFIXPT
@itemx -DNO_MF_ASM
@vindex FIXPT
@cindex fixed-point arithmetic
@cindex floating-point arithmetic
@cindex assembly language routines
@cindex fraction routines
Use the original WEB fixed-point routines for Metafont and MetaPost
arithmetic calculations regarding fractions.  By default,
assembly-language routines are used on x86 hardware with GNU C (unless
@samp{NO_MF_ASM} is defined), and floating-point routines are used
otherwise.

@item -DIPC_DEBUG
@vindex IPC_DEBUG
Report on various interprocess communication activities.  @xref{IPC and
TeX,, IPC and @TeX{}}.
@end table


@node Additional targets
@section Additional targets

@cindex additional Make targets
@cindex targets, additional Make
@cindex Make targets, additional

Web2c has several Make targets besides the standard ones.  You can invoke
these either in the top level directory of the source distribution (the
one containing @file{kpathsea/} and @file{web2c/}), or in the
@file{web2c/} directory.

@table @samp
@item c-sources
@cmindex c-sources @r{Makefile target}
@cindex non-Unix system, compiling on
Make only the C files, translated from the Web sources, presumably
because you want to take them to a non-Unix machine.

@item formats
@itemx install-formats
@cmindex formats @r{Make target}
@cmindex install-formats @r{Make target}
Make or install all the memory dumps (@pxref{Memory dumps}).  By
default, the standard plain formats plus @file{latex.fmt} are made.  You
can add other formats by redefining the @code{fmts}, @code{bases}, and
@code{mems} variables.  See the top of @file{web2c/Makefile} for the
possibilities.

@item fmts
@itemx install-fmts
@cmindex fmts @r{Make target}
@cmindex install-fmts @r{Make target}
Make or install the @TeX{} @file{.fmt} files. @xref{initex invocation}.

@item bases
@itemx install-bases
@cmindex bases @r{Make target}
@cmindex install-bases @r{Make target}
Make or install the Metafont @file{.base} files.  @xref{inimf invocation}.

@item mems
@itemx install-mems
@cmindex mems @r{Make target}
@cmindex install-mems @r{Make target}
Make or install the MetaPost @file{.mem} files.  @xref{inimpost invocation}.

@item triptrap
@itemx trip
@itemx trap
@itemx mptrap
@cmindex triptrap @r{Make target}
@findex trip @r{Make target}
@findex trap @r{Make target}
@findex mptrap @r{Make target}
To run the torture tests for @TeX{}, Metafont, and MetaPost
(respectively).  See the next section.

@end table


@node Triptrap
@section Trip, trap, and mptrap: Torture tests

@cindex Gruff, Billy Goat
@cindex trip test
@cindex trap test
@cindex mptrap test
@cindex torture tests

@flindex tripman.tex
@flindex trapman.tex
@flindex mptrap.readme
To validate your @TeX{}, Metafont, and MetaPost executables, run
@samp{make triptrap}.  This runs the trip, trap, and mptrap ``torture
tests''.  See the files @file{triptrap/tripman.tex},
@file{triptrap/trapman.tex}, and @file{triptrap/mptrap.readme} for
detailed information and background on the tests.

The differences between your executables' behavior and the standard
values will show up on your terminal.  The usual differences (these are
all acceptable) are:

@itemize @bullet
@item string usage and table sizes;
@item glue set ratios;
@item @samp{down4}, @samp{right4}, and @samp{y4} commands in DVItype output;
@item dates and times.
@end itemize

@noindent Any other differences are trouble. The most common culprit in
the past has been compiler bugs, especially when optimizing.
@xref{TeX or Metafont failing,, @TeX{} or Metafont failing, kpathsea,
Kpathsea}.

The files @file{trip.diffs}, @file{mftrap.diffs}, and
@file{mptrap.diffs} in the @file{triptrap} directory show the standard
diffs against the original output.  If you diff your diffs against these
files, you should come up clean.  For example
@example
make trip >&mytrip.diffs
diff triptrap/trip.diffs mytrip.diffs
@end example

To run the tests separately, use the targets @code{trip}, @code{trap},
and @code{mptrap}.

To run simple tests for all the programs as well as the torture tests,
run @samp{make check}.  You can compare the output to the distributed
file @file{tests/check.log} if you like.


@node Runtime options
@section Runtime options

@cindex runtime options

@cindex configuration file values
@cindex array sizes
Besides the configure- and compile-time options described in the
previous sections, you can control a number of parameters (in
particular, array sizes) in the @file{texmf.cnf} runtime file read by
Kpathsea (@pxref{Config files,,, kpathsea, Kpathsea}).

Rather than exhaustively listing them here, please see the last section
of the distributed @file{kpathsea/texmf.cnf}.  Some of the more
interesting values:

@vtable @samp
@item main_memory
Total words of memory available, for @TeX{}, Metafont, and MetaPost.
Must remake the format file after changing.

@item extra_mem_bot
@cindex boxes, memory for
@cindex glue, memory for
@cindex breakpoints, memory for
@cindex PiC@TeX{}, increasing memory for
Extra space for ``large'' @TeX{} data structures: boxes, glue,
breakpoints, et al.  If you use PiC@TeX{}, you may well want to set this.

@item font_mem_size
@cindex TFM files, memory for
Words of font info available for @TeX{}; this is approximately the total
size of all TFM files read.

@item hash_extra
@cindex control sequence names, space for
@cindex hash table, increasing size of
Additional space for the hash table of control sequence names.
Approximately 10,000 control sequences can be stored in the main hash
table; if you have a large book with numerous cross-references, 
this might not be enough, and thus you will want to set @code{hash_extra}.

@end vtable

@cindex array limit, fixed
@cindex swap space, as array limit
@cindex reallocation of arrays
@cindex dynamic array allocation
Of course, ideally all arrays would be dynamically expanded as
necessary, so the only limiting factor would be the amount of swap space
available.  Unfortunately, implementing this is extremely difficult, as
the fixed size of arrays is assumed in many places throughout the source
code.  These runtime limits are a practical compromise between the
compile-time limits in previous versions, and truly dynamic arrays.  (On
the other hand, the Web2c Bib@TeX{} implementation does do dynamic
reallocation of some arrays.)
