0intro 0intro
intro 0intro
9p 9p
Fid 9p
File 9p
Req 9p
Srv 9p
Tree 9p
_lib9p_emalloc 9p
_lib9p_erealloc 9p
_lib9p_estrdup 9p
allocfid 9p
allocfidpool 9p
allocmap 9p
allocreq 9p
allocreqpool 9p
caninsertkey 9p
closefid 9p
deletekey 9p
fcreate 9p
fdirread 9p
freefid 9p
freemap 9p
freereq 9p
fremove 9p
fwalk 9p
insertkey 9p
lookupfid 9p
lookupkey 9p
lookupreq 9p
mktree 9p
postmountsrv 9p
readbuf 9p
readstr 9p
respond 9p
srv 9p
threadpostmountsrv 9p
abort abort
abs abs
labs abs
access access
Dx addpt
Dy addpt
Pt addpt
Rect addpt
Rpt addpt
addpt addpt
canonrect addpt
combinerect addpt
divpt addpt
eqpt addpt
eqrect addpt
insetrect addpt
mulpt addpt
ptinrect addpt
rectXrect addpt
rectaddpt addpt
rectclip addpt
rectinrect addpt
rectsubpt addpt
subpt addpt
allocimage allocimage
allocimagemix allocimage
bytesperline allocimage
cloadimage allocimage
freeimage allocimage
loadimage allocimage
namedimage allocimage
nameimage allocimage
readimage allocimage
setalpha allocimage
unloadimage allocimage
wordsperline allocimage
writeimage allocimage
ARGBEGIN arg
ARGC arg
ARGEND arg
ARGF arg
EARGF arg
arg arg
arginit arg
argopt arg
add3 arith3
add4 arith3
arith3 arith3
closept3 arith3
cross3 arith3
dist3 arith3
div3 arith3
dot3 arith3
eqpt3 arith3
fff2p3 arith3
len3 arith3
lerp3 arith3
midpt3 arith3
mul3 arith3
nearseg3 arith3
neg3 arith3
pdiv4 arith3
pldist3 arith3
pn2f3 arith3
ppp2f3 arith3
reflect3 arith3
sub3 arith3
sub4 arith3
unit3 arith3
vdiv3 arith3
vrem3 arith3
assert assert
atof atof
atoi atof
atol atof
atoll atof
charstod atof
strtod atof
strtol atof
strtoll atof
strtoul atof
strtoull atof
addns auth
amount auth
apopchal auth
apopreply auth
auth auth
authdial auth
authenticate auth
authnonce auth
chalreply auth
convA2M auth
convM2A auth
convM2PR auth
convM2T auth
convM2TR auth
convPR2M auth
convT2M auth
convTR2M auth
cramchal auth
cramreply auth
getchal auth
httpauth auth
login auth
newns auth
noworld auth
nvcsum auth
passtokey auth
srvauth auth
srvauthnonce auth
vncchal auth
vncreply auth
bin bin
binalloc bin
binfree bin
bingrow bin
bind bind
mount bind
unmount bind
Bbuffered bio
Bfildes bio
Bflush bio
Bgetc bio
Bgetd bio
Bgetrune bio
Binit bio
Binits bio
Blinelen bio
Boffset bio
Bopen bio
Bprint bio
Bputc bio
Bputrune bio
Brdline bio
Bread bio
Bseek bio
Bterm bio
Bungetc bio
Bungetrune bio
Bwrite bio
bio bio
brk brk
sbrk brk
Font cachechars
Fontchar cachechars
Subfont cachechars
agefont cachechars
cachechars cachechars
loadchar cachechars
chdir chdir
cleanname cleanname
cmap2rgb color
cmap2rgba color
color color
rgb2cmap color
Control control
Controlset control
activate control
closecontrol control
closecontrolset control
control control
controlcalled control
controlwire control
createbox control
createbutton control
createentry control
createkeyboard control
createlabel control
createradiobutton control
createscribble control
createslider control
createtext control
createtextbutton control
ctlerror control
ctlmalloc control
ctlrealloc control
ctlstrdup control
deactivate control
freectlfont control
freectlimage control
initcontrols control
namectlfont control
namectlimage control
newcontrolset control
printctl control
resizecontrolset control
cputime cputime
times cputime
asctime ctime
ctime ctime
gmtime ctime
localtime ctime
timezone ctime
tm2sec ctime
_tolower ctype
_toupper ctype
ctype ctype
isalnum ctype
isalpha ctype
isascii ctype
iscntrl ctype
isdigit ctype
isgraph ctype
islower ctype
isprint ctype
ispunct ctype
isspace ctype
isupper ctype
isxdigit ctype
toascii ctype
tolower ctype
toupper ctype
beieee80ftos debugger
beieeedftos debugger
beieeesftos debugger
ciscframe debugger
cisctrace debugger
debugger debugger
fpformat debugger
ieeedftos debugger
ieeesftos debugger
leieee80ftos debugger
leieeedftos debugger
leieeesftos debugger
localaddr debugger
riscframe debugger
risctrace debugger
symoff debugger
calloc debugmalloc
debugmalloc debugmalloc
free debugmalloc
getmalloctag debugmalloc
getrealloctag debugmalloc
malloc debugmalloc
malloctopoolblock debugmalloc
mallocz debugmalloc
msize debugmalloc
realloc debugmalloc
setmalloctag debugmalloc
setrealloctag debugmalloc
showleak debugmalloc
accept dial
announce dial
dial dial
hangup dial
listen dial
netmkaddr dial
reject dial
setnetmtpt dial
dirread dirread
biosfake disk
disk disk
opendisk disk
ARROW draw
Image draw
_string draw
arc draw
bezier draw
bezspline draw
border draw
draw draw
drawrepl draw
drawreplxy draw
drawsetdebug draw
ellipse draw
fillarc draw
fillbezier draw
fillbezspline draw
fillellipse draw
fillpoly draw
gendraw draw
icossin draw
icossin2 draw
line draw
poly draw
replclipr draw
runestring draw
runestringbg draw
runestringn draw
runestringnbg draw
string draw
stringbg draw
stringn draw
stringnbg draw
dup dup
decrypt encrypt
encrypt encrypt
netcrypt encrypt
errstr errstr
werrstr errstr
Event event
Menu event
Mouse event
eatomouse event
ecankbd event
ecanmouse event
ecanread event
edrawgetrect event
egetrect event
einit event
ekbd event
emenuhit event
emouse event
emoveto event
eread event
ereadmouse event
eresized event
esetcursor event
estart event
estartfn event
etimer event
event event
_clock exec
_nprivates exec
_privates exec
exec exec
execl exec
_exits exits
atexit exits
atexitdont exits
exits exits
terminate exits
exp exp
log exp
log10 exp
pow exp
pow10 exp
sqrt exp
Fcall fcall
convD2M fcall
convM2D fcall
convM2S fcall
convS2M fcall
dirconv fcall
dirmodeconv fcall
fcall fcall
fcallconv fcall
getS fcall
fd2path fd2path
fgetc fgetc
fgets fgetc
fputc fgetc
fputs fgetc
fread fgetc
fwrite fgetc
getc fgetc
getchar fgetc
gets fgetc
putc fgetc
putchar fgetc
puts fgetc
ungetc fgetc
adler32 flate
blockcrc flate
deflate flate
deflateblock flate
deflateinit flate
deflatezlib flate
deflatezlibblock flate
flate flate
flateerr flate
inflate flate
inflateblock flate
inflateinit flate
inflatezlib flate
inflatezlibblock flate
mkcrctab flate
ceil floor
fabs floor
floor floor
fmod floor
clearerr fopen
fclose fopen
fdopen fopen
feof fopen
ferror fopen
fflush fopen
fgetpos fopen
fileno fopen
fopen fopen
freopen fopen
fseek fopen
fsetpos fopen
ftell fopen
rewind fopen
sclose fopen
setbuf fopen
setvbuf fopen
sopenr fopen
sopenw fopen
fork fork
rfork fork
fprintf fprintf
printf fprintf
snprintf fprintf
sprintf fprintf
vfprintf fprintf
vprintf fprintf
vsnprintf fprintf
vsprintf fprintf
frame frame
frcharofpt frame
frclear frame
frdelete frame
frdrawsel frame
frdrawsel0 frame
frgetmouse frame
frinit frame
frinittick frame
frinsert frame
frptofchar frame
frselect frame
frselectpaint frame
frsetrects frame
frtick frame
frexp frexp
ldexp frexp
modf frexp
fscanf fscanf
scanf fscanf
sscanf fscanf
vfscanf fscanf
fauth fsession
fsession fsession
getcallerpc getcallerpc
getenv getenv
putenv getenv
getfcr getfcr
getfsr getfcr
setfcr getfcr
setfsr getfcr
getfields getfields
tokenize getfields
getpid getpid
getppid getpid
getuser getuser
sysname getuser
getwd getwd
Cursor graphics
Display graphics
Pconv graphics
Point graphics
Rconv graphics
Rectangle graphics
bufimage graphics
buildfont graphics
chantodepth graphics
chantostr graphics
closedisplay graphics
cursorset graphics
cursorswitch graphics
drawerror graphics
flushimage graphics
freefont graphics
gengetwindow graphics
geninitdraw graphics
getdefont graphics
getwindow graphics
graphics graphics
initdisplay graphics
initdraw graphics
lockdisplay graphics
openfont graphics
strtochan graphics
unlockdisplay graphics
hypot hypot
defmask ip
eipconv ip
equivip ip
hnputl ip
hnputs ip
ip ip
isv4 ip
maskip ip
myetheraddr ip
myipaddr ip
nhgetl ip
nhgets ip
parseether ip
parseip ip
parseipmask ip
readipifc ip
v4parsecidr ip
v4parseip ip
v4tov6 ip
v6tov4 ip
isalpharune isalpharune
islowerrune isalpharune
isspacerune isalpharune
istitlerune isalpharune
isupperrune isalpharune
tolowerrune isalpharune
totitlerune isalpharune
toupperrune isalpharune
closekeyboard keyboard
ctlkeyboard keyboard
initkeyboard keyboard
keyboard keyboard
DSAprimes libsec
X509toRSApub libsec
block_cipher libsec
crtin libsec
crtout libsec
crtpre libsec
crtprefree libsec
crtresfree libsec
dec32 libsec
dec64 libsec
des3CBCdecrypt libsec
des3CBCencrypt libsec
des3ECBdecrypt libsec
des3ECBencrypt libsec
des56to64 libsec
des64to56 libsec
desCBCdecrypt libsec
desCBCencrypt libsec
desECBdecrypt libsec
desECBencrypt libsec
des_key_setup libsec
egalloc libsec
egdecrypt libsec
egencrypt libsec
egfree libsec
eggen libsec
egprivalloc libsec
egprivfree libsec
egprivtopub libsec
egpuballoc libsec
egpubfree libsec
egsigalloc libsec
egsigfree libsec
egsign libsec
egverify libsec
enc32 libsec
enc64 libsec
genprime libsec
genrandom libsec
gensafeprime libsec
genstrongprime libsec
hmac_md5 libsec
hmac_sha1 libsec
key_setup libsec
libsec libsec
md4 libsec
md5 libsec
prng libsec
probably_prime libsec
rc4 libsec
rc4back libsec
rc4skip libsec
rsaalloc libsec
rsadecrypt libsec
rsaencrypt libsec
rsafree libsec
rsagen libsec
rsaprivalloc libsec
rsaprivfree libsec
rsaprivtopub libsec
rsapuballoc libsec
rsapubfree libsec
setupDES3state libsec
setupDESstate libsec
setupRC4state libsec
sha1 libsec
smallprimetest libsec
triple_block_cipher libsec
atomic increment and decrement lock
canlock lock
canqlock lock
decref lock
incref lock
lock lock
qlock lock
qunlock lock
rlock lock
runlock lock
unlock lock
wlock lock
wunlock lock
attachproc mach
beswab mach
beswal mach
beswav mach
crackhdr mach
findseg mach
get1 mach
get2 mach
get4 mach
get8 mach
leswab mach
leswal mach
leswav mach
loadmap mach
mach mach
machbyname mach
machbytype mach
newmap mach
put1 mach
put2 mach
put4 mach
put8 mach
setmap mach
unusemap mach
calloc malloc
free malloc
getmalloctag malloc
getrealloctag malloc
malloc malloc
malloctopoolblock malloc
mallocz malloc
msize malloc
realloc malloc
setmalloctag malloc
setrealloctag malloc
adjoint matrix
determinant matrix
ident matrix
invertmat matrix
ixform matrix
look matrix
matmul matrix
matmulr matrix
matrix matrix
move matrix
persp matrix
popmat matrix
pushmat matrix
qrot matrix
rot matrix
scale matrix
viewport matrix
xform matrix
xformplane matrix
xformpoint matrix
xformpointd matrix
Memdata memdraw
Memdrawparam memdraw
Memimage memdraw
allocmemimage memdraw
allocmemimaged memdraw
allocmemsubfont memdraw
byteaddr memdraw
cloadmemimage memdraw
creadmemimage memdraw
drawclip memdraw
freememimage memdraw
freememsubfont memdraw
getmemdefont memdraw
hwdraw memdraw
iprint memdraw
loadmemimage memdraw
memarc memdraw
memdraw memdraw
memellipse memdraw
memfillcolor memdraw
memfillpoly memdraw
memimagedraw memdraw
memimageinit memdraw
memimageline memdraw
memimagemove memdraw
memimagestring memdraw
memlinebbox memdraw
memlineendsize memdraw
mempoly memdraw
memsetchan memdraw
memsubfontwidth memdraw
openmemsubfont memdraw
readmemimage memdraw
unloadmemimage memdraw
wordaddr memdraw
writememimage memdraw
memdraw memlayer
memlalloc memlayer
memlayer memlayer
memldelete memlayer
memlexpose memlayer
memlfree memlayer
memlhide memlayer
memline memlayer
memlnorefresh memlayer
memload memlayer
memlorigin memlayer
memlsetrefresh memlayer
memltofront memlayer
memltofrontn memlayer
memltorear memlayer
memltorearn memlayer
memunload memlayer
memccpy memory
memchr memory
memcmp memory
memcpy memory
memmove memory
memory memory
memset memory
mktemp mktemp
closemouse mouse
cursorswitch mouse
drawgetrect mouse
getrect mouse
initmouse mouse
menuhit mouse
mouse mouse
moveto mouse
readmouse mouse
setcursor mouse
 mp
betomp mp
crtin mp
crtout mp
crtpre mp
crtprefree mp
crtresfree mp
itomp mp
letomp mp
mp mp
mpadd mp
mpassign mp
mpbits mp
mpcmp mp
mpconv mp
mpcopy mp
mpdigdiv mp
mpdiv mp
mpexp mp
mpextendedgcd mp
mpfree mp
mpinvert mp
mpleft mp
mplowbits0 mp
mpmagadd mp
mpmagcmp mp
mpmagsub mp
mpmod mp
mpmul mp
mpnew mp
mpnorm mp
mprand mp
mpright mp
mpsetminbits mp
mpsignif mp
mpsub mp
mptoa mp
mptobe mp
mptoi mp
mptole mp
mptoui mp
mptouv mp
mptov mp
mpvecadd mp
mpveccmp mp
mpvecdigmuladd mp
mpvecdigmulsub mp
mpvecmul mp
mpvecsub mp
strtomp mp
uitomp mp
uvtomp mp
vtomp mp
muldiv muldiv
umuldiv muldiv
Inf nan
NaN nan
isInf nan
isNaN nan
nan nan
csgetval ndb
csipinfo ndb
dnsquery ndb
ipattr ndb
ndb ndb
ndbcat ndb
ndbclose ndb
ndbfree ndb
ndbgetval ndb
ndbhash ndb
ndbipinfo ndb
ndblookval ndb
ndbopen ndb
ndbparse ndb
ndbreopen ndb
ndbsearch ndb
ndbsnext ndb
atnotify notify
noted notify
notify notify
isar object
nextar object
object object
objtraverse object
objtype object
readar object
readobj object
close open
create open
open open
perror perror
sysfatal perror
syslog perror
pipe pipe
Plumbmsg plumb
eplumb plumb
plumb plumb
plumbaddattr plumb
plumbdelattr plumb
plumbfree plumb
plumblookup plumb
plumbopen plumb
plumbpack plumb
plumbpackattr plumb
plumbrecv plumb
plumbsend plumb
plumbunpack plumb
plumbunpackattr plumb
plumbunpackpartial plumb
pool pool
poolalloc pool
poolblockcheck pool
poolcheck pool
poolcompact pool
pooldump pool
poolfree pool
poolmsize pool
poolrealloc pool
postnote postnote
Strconv print
doprint print
fltconv print
fmtinstall print
fprint print
numbconv print
print print
seprint print
snprint print
sprint print
strconv print
privalloc privalloc
privfree privalloc
proto proto
rdproto proto
pushssl pushssl
qball qball
qsort qsort
mtoq quaternion
qadd quaternion
qdiv quaternion
qinv quaternion
qlen quaternion
qmid quaternion
qmul quaternion
qneg quaternion
qsqrt quaternion
qsub quaternion
qtom quaternion
quaternion quaternion
qunit quaternion
slerp quaternion
doquote quote
quote quote
quotefmtinstall quote
quoterunestrconv quote
quoterunestrdup quote
quotestrconv quote
quotestrdup quote
unquoterunestrdup quote
unquotestrdup quote
fastrand rand
frand rand
lnrand rand
lrand rand
n_truerand rand
nrand rand
rand rand
srand rand
truerand rand
pread read
pwrite read
read read
read9p read
readn read
write read
write9p read
RGB readcolmap
readcolmap readcolmap
writecolmap readcolmap
regcomp regexp
regcomplit regexp
regcompnl regexp
regerror regexp
regexec regexp
regexp regexp
regsub regexp
rregexec regexp
rregsub regexp
remove remove
rendezvous rendezvous
chartorune rune
fullrune rune
rune rune
runelen rune
runenlen rune
runetochar rune
utflen rune
utfnlen rune
utfrrune rune
utfrune rune
utfutf rune
runestrcat runestrcat
runestrchr runestrcat
runestrcmp runestrcat
runestrcpy runestrcat
runestrdup runestrcat
runestrecpy runestrcat
runestrlen runestrcat
runestrncat runestrcat
runestrncmp runestrcat
runestrncpy runestrcat
runestrrchr runestrcat
runestrstr runestrcat
recognize scribble
scribble scribble
scribblealloc scribble
openscsi scsi
scsi scsi
scsicmd scsi
scsierror scsi
scsiready scsi
seek seek
segattach segattach
segdetach segattach
segfree segattach
segbrk segbrk
segflush segflush
longjmp setjmp
notejmp setjmp
setjmp setjmp
acos sin
asin sin
atan sin
atan2 sin
cos sin
sin sin
tan sin
cosh sinh
sinh sinh
tanh sinh
alarm sleep
sleep sleep
dirfstat stat
dirfwstat stat
dirstat stat
dirwstat stat
fstat stat
fwstat stat
stat stat
wstat stat
cistrcmp strcat
cistrncmp strcat
cistrstr strcat
strcat strcat
strchr strcat
strcmp strcat
strcpy strcat
strcspn strcat
strdup strcat
strecpy strcat
strlen strcat
strncat strcat
strncmp strcat
strncpy strcat
strpbrk strcat
strrchr strcat
strspn strcat
strstr strcat
strtok strcat
s_alloc string
s_append string
s_array string
s_copy string
s_error string
s_free string
s_getline string
s_grow string
s_incref string
s_memappend string
s_nappend string
s_new string
s_newalloc string
s_parse string
s_putc string
s_read string
s_read_line string
s_reset string
s_restart string
s_terminate string
s_tolower string
s_unique string
string string
runestringnwidth stringsize
runestringsize stringsize
runestringwidth stringsize
stringnwidth stringsize
stringsize stringsize
stringwidth stringsize
allocsubfont subfont
freesubfont subfont
installsubfont subfont
lookupsubfont subfont
mkfont subfont
readsubfont subfont
readsubfonti subfont
stringsubfont subfont
strsubfontwidth subfont
subfont subfont
subfontname subfont
uninstallsubfont subfont
writesubfont subfont
file2pc symbol
fileelem symbol
fileline symbol
filesym symbol
findlocal symbol
findsym symbol
fnbound symbol
getauto symbol
getsym symbol
globalsym symbol
line2addr symbol
localsym symbol
lookup symbol
pc2line symbol
pc2sp symbol
symbase symbol
symbol symbol
syminit symbol
textseg symbol
textsym symbol
alt thread
chancreate thread
chanfree thread
chaninit thread
nbrecv thread
nbrecvp thread
nbrecvul thread
nbsend thread
nbsendp thread
nbsendul thread
proccreate thread
procdata thread
procexec thread
procexecl thread
procrfork thread
recv thread
recvp thread
recvul thread
send thread
sendp thread
sendul thread
thread thread
threadchdir thread
threadcreate thread
threaddata thread
threadexits thread
threadexitsall thread
threadgetgrp thread
threadgetname thread
threadkill thread
threadkillgrp thread
threadmain thread
threadnonotes thread
threadpid thread
threadprint thread
threadsetgrp thread
threadsetname thread
threadwaitchan thread
yield thread
nsec time
time time
tmpfile tmpfile
tmpnam tmpfile
wait wait
Screen window
allocscreen window
allocwindow window
bottomnwindows window
bottomwindow window
freescreen window
originwindow window
publicscreen window
topnwindows window
topwindow window
window window
