.TH BIBTEX 1 "24 November 1994" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.\"=====================================================================
.if t .ds TX \fRT\\h'-0.1667m'\\v'0.20v'E\\v'-0.20v'\\h'-0.125m'X\fP
.if n .ds TX TeX
.ie t .ds OX \fIT\v'+0.25m'E\v'-0.25m'X\fP\" for troff
.el .ds OX TeX\" for nroff
.\" the same but obliqued
.\" BX definition must follow TX so BX can use TX
.if t .ds BX \fRB\s-2IB\s0\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds BX BibTeX
.\" LX definition must follow TX so LX can use TX
.if t .ds LX \fRL\\h'-0.36m'\\v'-0.15v'\\s-2A\\s0\\h'-0.15m'\\v'0.15v'\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds LX LaTeX
.\"=====================================================================
.SH NAME
bibtex \- make a bibliography for (La)TeX
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bibtex
[
.BI -min-crossrefs =number
]
[
.B -terse
]
[
.I auxname
]
.\"=====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page is not meant to be exhaustive.  The complete
documentation for this version of \*(TX can be found in the info file
or manual
.IR "Web2C: A TeX implementation" .
.PP
\*(BX reads the top-level auxiliary
.RI ( .aux )
file that was output during the running of
.BR latex (1)
or
.BR tex (1)
and creates a bibliography
.RI ( .bbl )
file that will be incorporated into the document on subsequent runs of
\*(LX or \*(TX.  The
.I auxname
on the command line must be given without the
.I .aux
extension.  If you don't give the
.IR auxname ,
the program prompts you for it.
.PP
\*(BX looks up, in bibliographic database
.RI ( .bib )
files specified by the \\bibliography command,
the entries specified by the \\cite and \\nocite commands
in the \*(LX or \*(TX source file.
It formats the information from those entries
according to instructions in a bibliography style
.RI ( .bst )
file (specified by the \\bibliographystyle command,
and it outputs the results to the
.I .bbl
file.
.PP
The \*(LX manual
explains what a \*(LX source file must contain to work with \*(BX.
Appendix B of the manual describes the format of the
.I .bib
files. The `\*(BXing' document describes extensions and details of
this format, and it gives other useful hints for using \*(BX.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH OPTIONS
The
.B -min-crossrefs
option defines the minimum number of
.B crossref
required for automatic inclusion of the crossref'd entry on the citation
list; the default is two. 
With the
.B -terse
option, \*(BX operates silently.  Without it, a banner and progress
reports are printed on
.IR stdout .
.PP
.\"=====================================================================
.SH ENVIRONMENT
\*(BX searches the directories in the
path defined by the BSTINPUTS environment variable for
.I .bst
files. If BSTINPUTS is not set, it uses the system default.
For
.I .bib
files, it uses the BIBINPUTS environment variable if that is set,
otherwise the default.
See
.BR tex (1)
for the details of the searching.
.PP
If the environment variable
TEXMFOUTPUT is set, \*(BX attempts to put its output
files in it, if they cannot be put in the current directory.  Again, see
.BR tex (1).
No special searching is done for the
.I .aux
file.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH FILES
.TP
.I *.bst
Bibliography style files.
.TP
.I btxdoc.tex
``\*(BXing'' \- \*(LXable documentation for general \*(BX users
.TP
.I btxhak.tex
``Designing \*(BX Styles'' \- \*(LXable documentation for style designers
.TP
.I btxdoc.bib
database file for those two documents
.TP
.I xampl.bib
database file giving examples of all standard entry types
.TP
.I btxbst.doc
template file and documentation for the standard styles
.PP
All those files should be available somewhere on your system.
.PP
The host math.utah.edu has a vast collection of
.I .bib
files available for anonymous ftp, including references for all the
standard \*(TX books and a complete bibliography for TUGboat.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR latex (1),
.BR tex (1).
.br
Leslie Lamport,
.IR "\*(LX \- A Document Preparation System" ,
Addison-Wesley, 1985, ISBN 0-201-15790-X.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH AUTHOR
Oren Patashnik, Stanford University.  This man page describes the web2c
version of \*(BX.  Other ports of \*(BX, such as Donald Knuth's version
using the Sun Pascal compiler, do not have the same path searching
implementation, or the command-line options.
