.TH DVITYPE 1 "19 December 1994" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.\"=====================================================================
.if t .ds TX \fRT\\h'-0.1667m'\\v'0.20v'E\\v'-0.20v'\\h'-0.125m'X\fP
.if n .ds TX TeX
.ie t .ds OX \fIT\v'+0.25m'E\v'-0.25m'X\fP\" for troff
.el .ds OX TeX\" for nroff
.\" the same but obliqued
.\" BX definition must follow TX so BX can use TX
.if t .ds BX \fRB\s-2IB\s0\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds BX BibTeX
.\" LX definition must follow TX so LX can use TX
.if t .ds LX \fRL\\h'-0.36m'\\v'-0.15v'\s-2A\s0\\h'-0.15m'\\v'0.15v'\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds LX LaTeX
.\"=====================================================================
.SH NAME
dvitype \- translate a dvi file for humans
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dvitype
.I dvi_name[.dvi]
.\"=====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page is not meant to be exhaustive.  The complete
documentation for this version of \*(TX can be found in the info file
or manual
.IR "Web2C: A TeX implementation" .
.PP
The
.B dvitype
program translates a DVI (DeVice Independent) file output by (for example)
.BR tex (1)
or
.BR gftodvi (1),
to a file that humans can read. It also serves as a DVI file-validating
program (i.e., if
.B dvitype
can read it, it's correct) and as an example of a DVI-reading
program for future device drivers.
.PP
The output file can include all commands, just the important
ones, or none at all (in which case only errors are reported).
A subinterval of pages may be selected for transliteration; the
magnification and resolution of the ``output device'' may be
changed; and so on. All options are specified with an on-line dialog.
.PP
The
.I .dvi
extension is supplied if omitted from 
.IR dvi_name .
The output goes to
.IR stdout .
.\"=====================================================================
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The environment variable TEXFONTS is used to search for the TFM files
used in the DVI file.  See
.BR tex (1)
for the details of the searching.
If TEXFONTS is not set, it uses the system default.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR gftype (1),
.BR pktype (1).
.br
Donald E. Knuth,
.IR \*(OXware .
.\"=====================================================================
.SH BUGS
The interactive dialog should be replaced by command-line options, as
with 
.BR gftype .
.SH AUTHORS
Donald E. Knuth wrote the program.  It was published as part of the
.I \*(OXware
technical report, available from the \*(TX Users Group.
Howard Trickey and Pavel Curtis originally ported it to Unix.
