.TH GFTODVI 1 "14 December 1993" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.\"=====================================================================
.if n .ds MF Metafont
.if t .ds MF M\s-2ETAFONT\s0
.if t .ds TX \fRT\\h'-0.1667m'\\v'0.20v'E\\v'-0.20v'\\h'-0.125m'X\fP
.if n .ds TX TeX
.ie t .ds OX \fIT\v'+0.25m'E\v'-0.25m'X\fP\" for troff
.el .ds OX TeX\" for nroff
.\" the same but obliqued
.\" BX definition must follow TX so BX can use TX
.if t .ds BX \fRB\s-2IB\s0\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds BX BibTeX
.\" LX definition must follow TX so LX can use TX
.if t .ds LX \fRL\\h'-0.36m'\\v'-0.15v'\s-2A\s0\\h'-0.15m'\\v'0.15v'\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds LX LaTeX
.\"=====================================================================
.SH NAME
gftodvi \- make proof sheets from generic font files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gftodvi
[
.BI \-overflow-label-offset =real
]
[
.B \-verbose
]
[
.I gf_file_name
]
.\"=====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page is not meant to be exhaustive.  The complete
documentation for this version of \*(TX can be found in the info file
or manual
.IR "Web2C: A TeX implementation" .
.PP
The
.B gftodvi
program converts a generic font
.RI ( gf )
file output by, for example,
.BR mf (1),
to a device independent (DVI) file (that can then be typeset using the same
software that has already been written for \*(TX). The characters in the
.I gf
file will appear one per page, with labels, titles, and annotations
as specified in Appendix H (Hardcopy Proofs) of
.IR "The \*(MFbook" .
.PP
.B gftodvi
uses other fonts in addition to the main
.I gf
file.
A `gray' font is used to typeset the
pixels that actually make up the character. (We wouldn't
want all the pixels to be simply black, since then labels,
key points, and other information would be lost.)  A `title' font
is used for the information at the top of the page. A `label' font
is used for the labels on key points of the figure. A `slant'
font is used to typeset diagonal lines, which
otherwise have to be simulated using horizontal and vertical rules.
The default gray, title, and label fonts are
.IR gray ,
.IR cmr8 ,
and
.IR cmtt10 ,
respectively; there is no default slant font.
.PP
To change the default fonts, you can give
.BR special
commands in your
\*(MF source file, or you can change the fonts online. An online dialog
ensues if you end the
.I gf_file_name
with a `/'. For example,
.br
.ti +2
gftodvi cmr10.300gf/
.br
.ti +2
Special font substitution: grayfont black
.br
.ti +2
OK; any more? grayfontarea /home/art/don/
.br
.ti +2
OK; any more? slantfont /home/fonts/slantimagen6
.br
.ti +2
OK; any more? <RET>
.br
will use
.I /home/art/don/black
as the `gray' font and
.I /home/fonts/slantimagen6
as the `slant' font (this name indicates
a font for lines with slope 1/6 at the resolution of an Imagen printer).
.PP
The
.I gf_file_name
on the command line must be complete. (The program prompts
you for it if you don't give it.)  Because
the resolution is part of the extension, it would not make
sense to append a default extension as is done with \*(TX or
DVI-reading software. The output file name defaults to the same
root as the
.I gf
file, with the
.I dvi
extension added. For example, the input file
.I cmr10.2602gf
would become
.IR cmr10.dvi .
.\"=====================================================================
.SH OPTIONS
The argument to
.B \-overflow-label-offset
specifies the distance from the right edge of the character
bounding box at which the overflow equations (if any) are typeset.
The value is given in \*(TX points.  The default is a little over two
inches.
.PP
Without the
.B \-verbose
option,
.B gftodvi
operates silently.  With it, a banner and progress report are printed on
.IR stdout .
.\"=====================================================================
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.B gftodvi
looks for
.I gf_file_name
using the
environment variable GFFONTS.  If that is not set, it uses the variable
TEXFONTS. If that is not set, it uses the system default.
.PP
See
.BR tex (1)
for the details of the searching.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH FILES
.TP
.I {gray.tfm,.\|.\|.}
The default fonts.
.TP
.I {gray.mf,.\|.\|.}
The \*(MF sources.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR tex (1),
.BR mf (1).
.br
Donald E. Knuth,
.I "The \*(MFbook"
(Volume C of
.IR "Computers and Typesetting" ),
Addison-Wesley, 1986, ISBN 0-201-13445-4.
.br
Donald E. Knuth et al.,
.IR \*(MFware .
.\"=====================================================================
.SH AUTHORS
Donald E. Knuth wrote the program. It was published as part of the
.I \*(MFware
technical report, available from the \*(TX Users Group.
Paul Richards ported it to Unix.
