.TH GFTOPK 1 "14 December 1993" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.\"=====================================================================
.if n .ds MF Metafont
.if t .ds MF M\s-2ETAFONT\s0
.if t .ds TX \fRT\\h'-0.1667m'\\v'0.20v'E\\v'-0.20v'\\h'-0.125m'X\fP
.if n .ds TX TeX
.ie t .ds OX \fIT\v'+0.25m'E\v'-0.25m'X\fP\" for troff
.el .ds OX TeX\" for nroff
.\" the same but obliqued
.\" BX definition must follow TX so BX can use TX
.if t .ds BX \fRB\s-2IB\s0\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds BX BibTeX
.\" LX definition must follow TX so LX can use TX
.if t .ds LX \fRL\\h'-0.36m'\\v'-0.15v'\s-2A\s0\\h'-0.15m'\\v'0.15v'\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds LX LaTeX
.\"=====================================================================
.SH NAME
gftopk \- convert generic font files to packed font files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gftopk
[
.B \-v
]
.I gf_file_name
[
.I pk_file_name
]
.\"=====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page is not meant to be exhaustive.  The complete
documentation for this version of \*(TX can be found in the info file
or manual
.IR "Web2C: A TeX implementation" .
.PP
The
.B gftopk
program converts a generic font file output by, for example,
.BR mf (1),
to a
packed font file for use by DVI-reading programs. Packed
font files
.RI ( pk " files)"
are much smaller than the corresponding
.I gf
files,
so they are generally the font format of choice.
.PP
The
.I gf_file_name
on the command line must be complete. Because
the resolution is part of the extension, it would not make
sense to append a default extension as is done with \*(TX or
DVI-reading software. The
.I pk_file_name
defaults to the same (stripped) name as
.IR gf_file_name ,
and it is placed in the current
working directory with the
.I pk
suffix replacing
.IR gf .
For example, the input file
.I cmr10.300gf
would become
.IR cmr10.300pk .
.\"=====================================================================
.SH OPTIONS
Unless the
.B \-v
switch is given,
.B gftopk
operates silently.  With
.BR \-v ,
the version number of the program and statistics about the
packing are output to
.IR stdout .
.\"=====================================================================
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.B gftopk
looks for
.I gf_file_name
first in the current directory.  If it is not present there, it uses the
environment variable GFFONTS.  If that is not set, it uses the variable
TEXFONTS.  If that is not set, it uses the system default.
.PP
See
.BR tex (1)
for the details of the searching.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR gftype (1),
.BR pktogf (1),
.BR pktype (1).
.br
Donald E. Knuth et al.,
.IR \*(MFware .
.\"=====================================================================
.SH AUTHORS
Tomas Rokicki wrote the program. It was published as
part of the
.I \*(MFware
technical report, available from the \*(TX Users Group.
Paul Richards originally ported it to Unix.
