.TH GFTYPE 1 "14 December 1993" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.\"=====================================================================
.if n .ds MF Metafont
.if t .ds MF M\s-2ETAFONT\s0
.if t .ds TX \fRT\\h'-0.1667m'\\v'0.20v'E\\v'-0.20v'\\h'-0.125m'X\fP
.if n .ds TX TeX
.ie t .ds OX \fIT\v'+0.25m'E\v'-0.25m'X\fP\" for troff
.el .ds OX TeX\" for nroff
.\" the same but obliqued
.\" BX definition must follow TX so BX can use TX
.if t .ds BX \fRB\s-2IB\s0\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds BX BibTeX
.\" LX definition must follow TX so LX can use TX
.if t .ds LX \fRL\\h'-0.36m'\\v'-0.15v'\s-2A\s0\\h'-0.15m'\\v'0.15v'\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds LX LaTeX
.\"=====================================================================
.SH NAME
gftype \- translate a generic font file for humans to read
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gftype
[
.B \-i
]
[
.B \-m
]
.I gf_file_name
[
.I output_file_name
]
.\"=====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page is not meant to be exhaustive.  The complete
documentation for this version of \*(TX can be found in the info file
or manual
.IR "Web2C: A TeX implementation" .
.PP
The
.B gftype
program
translates a
.I gf
(generic font) file output by, for example,
.BR mf (1),
to a file that humans can read.
It also serves as a
.I gf
file-validating
program (i.e., if
.B gftype
can read it, it's correct) and as an example of a
.IR gf -reading
program for other software that wants to read
.I gf
files.
.PP
The
.I gf_file_name
on the command line must be complete. Because
the resolution is part of the extension, it would not make
sense to append a default extension as is done with \*(TX or
DVI-reading software. If no
.I output_file_name
is specified, the output goes to
.IR stdout .
.\"=====================================================================
.SH OPTIONS
The output file includes
bitmap images of the characters, if
.B \-i
is given on the command line, and a symbolic listing of the
.I gf
commands, if
.B \-m
is specified.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.B gftype
looks for
.I gf_file_name
using the
environment variable GFFONTS.  If that is not set, it uses the variable
TEXFONTS.  If that is not set, it uses the system default.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR dvitype (1),
.BR pktype (1).
.br
Donald E. Knuth et al.,
.IR \*(MFware .
.\"=====================================================================
.SH AUTHORS
David Fuchs and Don Knuth wrote the program.  It was published as
part of the
.I \*(MFware
technical report, available from the \*(TX Users Group.
Paul Richards originally ported it to Unix.
