.TH MAKEMPX 1 "4 January 1998" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.\"=====================================================================
.if n .ds MP MetaPost
.if t .ds MP MetaPost
.if n .ds MF Metafont
.if t .ds MF M\s-2ETAFONT\s0
.if t .ds TX \fRT\\h'-0.1667m'\\v'0.20v'E\\v'-0.20v'\\h'-0.125m'X\fP
.if n .ds TX TeX
.ie t .ds OX \fIT\v'+0.25m'E\v'-0.25m'X\fP\" for troff
.el .ds OX TeX\" for nroff
.\" the same but obliqued
.\" BX definition must follow TX so BX can use TX
.if t .ds BX \fRB\s-2IB\s0\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds BX BibTeX
.\" LX definition must follow TX so LX can use TX
.if t .ds LX \fRL\\h'-0.36m'\\v'-0.15v'\s-2A\s0\\h'-0.15m'\\v'0.15v'\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds LX LaTeX
.\"=====================================================================
.SH NAME
makempx \- typeset labels in MetaPost pictures with TeX or Troff
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B makempx
.RI [ --tex | --troff ]
.I mpfile mpxfile
.\"=====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page is not meant to be exhaustive.  The complete
documentation for this version of \*(TX can be found in the info file
or manual
.IR "Web2C: A TeX implementation" .
.PP
If
.I mpxfile
is older than
.IR mpfile ,
translate the labels from the \*(MP input file
.I mpfile
to low-level commands in
.IR MPXFILE ,
by running
.BR "mpto -tex" ,
.BR tex ,
and
.B dvitomp
by default; or, if
.B -troff
is specified,
.BR "mpto -troff" ,
.BR "eqn -d\e$\e$ | troff -Tpost" ,
and
.BR dmp .
.PP
The current directory is used for writing temporary files.  Errors are
left in
.IR mpxerr.{tex,log,dvi} .
.PP
If the file named in
.I $MPTEXPRE
(mptexpre.tex by default) exists, it is prepended to the output in tex
mode.
.PP
.B makempx
is typically called by
.BR mpost ,
not from the command line.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH OPTIONS
.B makempx
accepts the following options:
.TP
.B --help
.rb
Print help message and exit.
.TP
.B --tex
.rb
Assume input file contains \*(TX commands.
.TP
.B --troff
.rb
Assume input file contains Troff commands.
.TP
.B --version
.rb
Print version information and exit.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR mpost (1),
.BR mpto (1).
