.TH MFT 1 "14 December 1993" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.\"=====================================================================
.if n .ds MF Metafont
.if t .ds MF M\s-2ETAFONT\s0
.if t .ds TX \fRT\\h'-0.1667m'\\v'0.20v'E\\v'-0.20v'\\h'-0.125m'X\fP
.if n .ds TX TeX
.ie t .ds OX \fIT\v'+0.25m'E\v'-0.25m'X\fP\" for troff
.el .ds OX TeX\" for nroff
.\" the same but obliqued
.\" BX definition must follow TX so BX can use TX
.if t .ds BX \fRB\s-2IB\s0\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds BX BibTeX
.\" LX definition must follow TX so LX can use TX
.if t .ds LX \fRL\\h'-0.36m'\\v'-0.15v'\s-2A\s0\\h'-0.15m'\\v'0.15v'\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds LX LaTeX
.\"=====================================================================
.SH NAME
mft \- translate Metafont code to TeX code for prettyprinting
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mft
.I mf_file_name[.mf]
[
[
.B \-c
]
or
[
.I change_file_name[.ch]
]
]
[
[
.B \-s
]
or
[
.I style_file_name[.mft]
]
]
.\"=====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page is not meant to be exhaustive.  The complete
documentation for this version of \*(TX can be found in the info file
or manual
.IR "Web2C: A TeX implementation" .
.PP
The
.B mft
program creates a \*(TX file from a \*(MF program.
It takes appropriate care of typographic details like page
layout and the use of indentation, italics, boldface, etc., as illustrated
in the book
.IR "Computer Modern Typefaces" .
Special conventions in \*(MF comments allow you to control things that
would not otherwise come out right; section 1 of the MFT source program
in the
.I \*(MFware
report explains these rules.
.PP
The command line has one required file name and two optional file names.
The required
one is a \*(MF source file; there is also an optional change file
(which works just as the change files to
.BR tangle (1)
and
.BR weave (1)
do)
and an optional style file (which is prepended to everything).
.PP
A file name that doesn't contain a dot is always given an extension,
either
.I .mf
(\*(MF) or
.I .ch
(change) or
.I .mft
(style). If no style file is specified, the style file
.I plain.mft
is automatically used. The
.I change_file_name
is not searched for using any paths. The
.I .mf
file is searched for using the MFINPUTS environment variable if you
have set it, or else the system default.  The style file is searched
for using the TEXINPUTS environment variable.  See
.BR tex (1)
for the details of the searching.
.PP
The output \*(TX file name is formed by using
.I .tex
in place of the extension of
.IR mf_file_name .
.\"=====================================================================
.SH OPTIONS
Specify command-line options
.B \-c
to suppress the reading of a change file, and
.B \-s
to suppress the reading of a style file.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH FILES
.TP
.I mftmac.tex
\*(TX macros used by
.B mft
output.
.TP
.I plain.mft
Default style file.
.TP
.I cmbase.mft
Style file for Computer Modern.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR mf (1),
.BR weave (1).
.br
Donald E. Knuth,
.I Computer Modern Typefaces
(Volume E of
.IR "Computers and Typesetting" ),
Addison-Wesley, 1986, ISBN 0-201-13446-2.
.br
Donald E. Knuth et al.,
.IR \*(MFware .
.\"=====================================================================
.SH AUTHORS
Donald E. Knuth wrote the program, and he ported it to Unix with the help of
Pierre MacKay and the Unix port of
.B weave
by Howard Trickey and Pavel Curtis.
The program is published in the
.I \*(MFware
technical report, available from the \*(TX Users Group.
