.TH MPTO 1 "4 January 1998" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.\"=====================================================================
.if n .ds MP MetaPost
.if t .ds MP MetaPost
.if n .ds MF Metafont
.if t .ds MF M\s-2ETAFONT\s0
.if t .ds TX \fRT\\h'-0.1667m'\\v'0.20v'E\\v'-0.20v'\\h'-0.125m'X\fP
.if n .ds TX TeX
.ie t .ds OX \fIT\v'+0.25m'E\v'-0.25m'X\fP\" for troff
.el .ds OX TeX\" for nroff
.\" the same but obliqued
.\" BX definition must follow TX so BX can use TX
.if t .ds BX \fRB\s-2IB\s0\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds BX BibTeX
.\" LX definition must follow TX so LX can use TX
.if t .ds LX \fRL\\h'-0.36m'\\v'-0.15v'\s-2A\s0\\h'-0.15m'\\v'0.15v'\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds LX LaTeX
.\"=====================================================================
.SH NAME
mpto \- extract labels in MetaPost pictures for typesetting
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mpto
.RI [ -tex | -troff ]
.I mpfile
.\"=====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page is not meant to be exhaustive.  The complete
documentation for this version of \*(TX can be found in the info file
or manual
.IR "Web2C: A TeX implementation" .
.PP
Strip
.I btex..etex
and
.I verbatimtex...etex
parts from \*(MP input file
.IR mpfile ,
converting to either \*(TX or Troff (\*(TX by default).  The generated
code is dumped on standard output.
.PP
.B mpto
is typically called by
.BR makempx ,
not from the command line.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH OPTIONS
.B mpto
accepts the following options:
.TP
.B --help
.rb
Print help message and exit.
.TP
.B -tex
.rb
Assume input file contains \*(TX commands.
.TP
.B -troff
.rb
Assume input file contains Troff commands.
.TP
.B --version
.rb
Print version information and exit.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR mpost (1),
.BR makempx (1).
