.TH PATGEN 1 "27 December 1992" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.\"=====================================================================
.if t .ds TX \fRT\\h'-0.1667m'\\v'0.20v'E\\v'-0.20v'\\h'-0.125m'X\fP
.if n .ds TX TeX
.ie t .ds OX \fIT\v'+0.25m'E\v'-0.25m'X\fP\" for troff
.el .ds OX TeX\" for nroff
.\" the same but obliqued
.\" BX definition must follow TX so BX can use TX
.if t .ds BX \fRB\s-2IB\s0\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds BX BibTeX
.\" LX definition must follow TX so LX can use TX
.if t .ds LX \fRL\\h'-0.36m'\\v'-0.15v'\s-2A\s0\\h'-0.15m'\\v'0.15v'\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds LX LaTeX
.\"=====================================================================
.SH NAME
patgen \- generate patterns for TeX hyphenation
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B patgen
dictionary_file pattern_file log_file translate_file
.\"=====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page is not meant to be exhaustive.  The complete
documentation for this version of \*(TX can be found in the info file
or manual
.IR "Web2C: A TeX implementation" .
.PP
The
.B patgen
program reads the
.I dictionary_file
and produces the
.IR pattern_file ,
writing a transcript of its actions on the
.IR log_file .
The
.I dictionary_file
should contain a list of hyphenated words and
previously-generated patterns.
.PP
The patterns thus generated can be read by
.B initex
for use in hyphenating words. For a (very) long example of
.IR patgen 's
output, see
.IR $TEXMFMAIN/generic/hyphen/hyphen.tex ,
which contains the patterns \*(TX uses for English.
At some sites, patterns for several other languages may be available,
and the local
.B tex
programs may have them preloaded; consult your
.I Local Guide
or your system administrator for details.
.PP
All filenames must be complete; no adding of default
extensions or path searching is done.
.PP
.\"=====================================================================
.SH FILES
.TP \w'@@'u+2n
.I $TEXMFMAIN/generic/hyphen/hyphen.tex
Patterns for English.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
Frank Liang,
.IR "Word hy-phen-a-tion by com-puter" ,
STAN-CS-83-977,
Stanford University Ph.D. thesis, 1983.
.br
Donald E. Knuth,
.IR "The \*(OXbook" ,
Addison-Wesley, 1986, ISBN 0-201-13447-0, Appendix H.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH AUTHORS
Frank Liang wrote the first version of this program.  Peter
Breitenlohner made a
substantial revision in 1991 for \*(TX 3.
The first version was published as the appendix to the
.I \*(OXware
technical report, available from the \*(TX Users Group. Howard Trickey
originally ported it to Unix.
