.TH PKTYPE 1 "13 March 1996" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.\"=====================================================================
.if n .ds MF Metafont
.if t .ds MF M\s-2ETAFONT\s0
.if t .ds TX \fRT\\h'-0.1667m'\\v'0.20v'E\\v'-0.20v'\\h'-0.125m'X\fP
.if n .ds TX TeX
.ie t .ds OX \fIT\v'+0.25m'E\v'-0.25m'X\fP\" for troff
.el .ds OX TeX\" for nroff
.\" the same but obliqued
.\" BX definition must follow TX so BX can use TX
.if t .ds BX \fRB\s-2IB\s0\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds BX BibTeX
.\" LX definition must follow TX so LX can use TX
.if t .ds LX \fRL\\h'-0.36m'\\v'-0.15v'\s-2A\s0\\h'-0.15m'\\v'0.15v'\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds LX LaTeX
.\"=====================================================================
.SH NAME
pktype \- verify and translate a packed font bitmap file to plain text
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pktype
.I pk_file
[
.I output_file
]
.\"=====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page is not meant to be exhaustive.  The complete
documentation for this version of \*(TX can be found in the info file
or manual
.IR "Web2C: A TeX implementation" .
.PP
The
.B pktype
program translates a packed font file
.RI ( pk )
(output by, for example,
.BR gftopk (1)
to a file that humans can read. It also serves as a
.I pk
file-validating program (i.e., if
.B pktype
can read it, it's correct) and as an example of a
.IR pk -reading
program for other software that wants to read
.I pk
files.
.PP
The
.I pk_file
on the command line must be complete. Because
the resolution is part of the extension, it would not make
sense to append a default extension as is done with \*(TX or
DVI-reading software. If no
.I output_file
is specified, the plain text translation is written to standard output.
.PP
The output file gives a compact encoding of the packed encoding, using
conventions described in the source code. Run lengths of black pixels
alternate with parenthesized run lengths of white pixels, and brackets
are used to indicate when a row should be repeated.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.B pktype
looks for
.I pk_file
using the environment variable PKFONTS.  If that is not set, it uses
the variable TEXPKS.  If that is not set, it uses TEXFONTS.  If that
is not set, it uses the system default.
.PP
See
.BR tex (1)
for the details of the searching.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR dvitype (1),
.BR gftopk (1),
.BR gftype (1).
.br
Donald E. Knuth et al.,
.IR \*(MFware .
.\"=====================================================================
.SH AUTHORS
Tomas Rokicki wrote the program.
Donald E. Knuth originally ported it to Unix.
Pierre MacKay adapted it for compilation with Web2c.
