.TH PLTOTF 1 "27 December 1992" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.\"=====================================================================
.if n .ds MF Metafont
.if t .ds MF M\s-2ETAFONT\s0
.if t .ds TX \fRT\\h'-0.1667m'\\v'0.20v'E\\v'-0.20v'\\h'-0.125m'X\fP
.if n .ds TX TeX
.ie t .ds OX \fIT\v'+0.25m'E\v'-0.25m'X\fP\" for troff
.el .ds OX TeX\" for nroff
.\" the same but obliqued
.\" BX definition must follow TX so BX can use TX
.if t .ds BX \fRB\s-2IB\s0\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds BX BibTeX
.\" LX definition must follow TX so LX can use TX
.if t .ds LX \fRL\\h'-0.36m'\\v'-0.15v'\s-2A\s0\\h'-0.15m'\\v'0.15v'\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds LX LaTeX
.if n .ds WB Web
.if t .ds WB W\s-2EB\s0
.\"=====================================================================
.SH NAME
pltotf \- convert property list files to TeX font metric (tfm) format
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pltotf
[
.B \-verbose
]
.I pl_file_name
.I tfm_file_name
.\"=====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page is not meant to be exhaustive.  The complete
documentation for this version of \*(TX can be found in the info file
or manual
.IR "Web2C: A TeX implementation" .
.PP
The
.B pltotf
program translates a (human-oriented) \*(WB property list file to a
(program-oriented) \*(TX font metric file. Thus, after editing the property
list file, a TFM file can be generated for use with, for example,
.BR tex (1).
.PP
Both the
.I pl_file_name
and the
.I tfm_file_name
must be complete; no adding of default extensions or path searching is done.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH OPTIONS
Without the
.B \-verbose
option,
.B pltotf
operates silently.  With it, a banner and progress report are printed on
.IR stdout .
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR tftopl (1).
.br
Donald E. Knuth,
.IR "\*(OXware" .
.br
Donald E. Knuth,
.IR "The \*(MFbook" ,
(Volume C of
.IR "Computers and Typesetting" ),
Addison-Wesley, 1986, ISBN 0-201-13445-4.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH AUTHORS
Donald E. Knuth wrote the program. It was published as
part of the
.I \*(OXware
technical report, available from the \*(TX Users Group.
Howard Trickey, Pavel Curtis, and Richard Furuta originally ported it to
Unix.
