.TH VFTOVP 1 "19 December 1994" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.\"=====================================================================
.if t .ds TX \fRT\\h'-0.1667m'\\v'0.20v'E\\v'-0.20v'\\h'-0.125m'X\fP
.if n .ds TX TeX
.ie t .ds OX \fIT\v'+0.25m'E\v'-0.25m'X\fP\" for troff
.el .ds OX TeX\" for nroff
.\" the same but obliqued
.\" BX definition must follow TX so BX can use TX
.if t .ds BX \fRB\s-2IB\s0\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds BX BibTeX
.\" LX definition must follow TX so LX can use TX
.if t .ds LX \fRL\\h'-0.36m'\\v'-0.15v'\s-2A\s0\\h'-0.15m'\\v'0.15v'\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds LX LaTeX
.\"=====================================================================
.SH NAME
vftovp \- convert virtual font (vf) files to virtual property lists (vpl)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vftovp
[
.BI \-charcode-format =format
]
[
.B \-verbose
]
.I vf_name[.vf]
.I tfm_name[.tfm]
[
.I vpl_name[.vpl]
]
.\"=====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page is not meant to be exhaustive.  The complete
documentation for this version of \*(TX can be found in the info file
or manual
.IR "Web2C: A TeX implementation" .
.PP
The
.B vftovp
program translates a (program-oriented) virtual font file and its
accompanying \*(TX font metric file to a (human-oriented) property list file.
Thus, the virtual font can be edited, and its exact contents can be
displayed mnemonically.  It also serves as a VF-file validating program;
if no error messages are given, the input files are correct.
.PP
The filenames are extended with the appropriate extension if necessary.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH OPTIONS
The argument
.I format
to
.B \-charcode-format
specifies how character codes are output in the VPL file.  By
default, only letters and digits are output using the
.B C
integer code (i.e., in ASCII); the others are output in octal.  (Unless
the font's coding scheme starts with
.B "TeX math sy"
or
.BR "TeX math ex" ,
when all are output in octal.)  If
.I format
is
.BR ascii ,
all character codes that correspond to graphic characters, besides the
left and right parentheses, are output in ASCII.  On the other hand, if
.I format
is
.BR octal ,
all character codes are output in octal.
.PP
Without the
.B \-verbose
option,
.B vftovp
operates silently.  With it, a banner and progress report are printed on
.IR stdout .
.\"=====================================================================
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.B vftovp
looks for
.I vf_name
using the
environment variable VFFONTS.  If that is not set, it uses the variable
TEXFONTS.  If that is not set, it uses the system default.
.PP
See
.BR tex (1)
for the details of the searching.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR pltotf (1),
.BR tftopl (1),
.BR vptovf (1).
.\"=====================================================================
.SH AUTHORS
Donald E. Knuth wrote the program, based in part on an idea of David Fuchs,
starting with the code for
.BR tftopl (1).
Karl Berry adapted it for compilation with
.BR web2c .
