.TH VPTOVF 1 "16 December 1994" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.\"=====================================================================
.if t .ds TX \fRT\\h'-0.1667m'\\v'0.20v'E\\v'-0.20v'\\h'-0.125m'X\fP
.if n .ds TX TeX
.ie t .ds OX \fIT\v'+0.25m'E\v'-0.25m'X\fP\" for troff
.el .ds OX TeX\" for nroff
.\" the same but obliqued
.\" BX definition must follow TX so BX can use TX
.if t .ds BX \fRB\s-2IB\s0\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds BX BibTeX
.\" LX definition must follow TX so LX can use TX
.if t .ds LX \fRL\\h'-0.36m'\\v'-0.15v'\s-2A\s0\\h'-0.15m'\\v'0.15v'\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds LX LaTeX
.\"=====================================================================
.SH NAME
vptovf \- convert virtual property lists to virtual font metrics
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vptovf
[
.B \-verbose
]
.I vpl_name[.vpl]
.I vfm_name[.vf]
.I tfm_name[.tfm]
.\"=====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page is not meant to be exhaustive.  The complete
documentation for this version of \*(TX can be found in the info file
or manual
.IR "Web2C: A TeX implementation" .
.PP
The
.B vptovf
program translates a (human-oriented) property list file to a pair of
(program-oriented) files in the VF (virtual font) and TFM (\*(TX font metric)
formats. Thus, a virtual font
file can be edited and its exact contents
can be displayed mnemonically.
New virtual fonts, which map characters as seen by \*(TX into an arbitrary
sequence of low-level typesetting operations,
can also be created in this way.
.PP
All three filenames,
.I vpl_name,
.I vf_name,
and
.I tfm_name,
are extended with the appropriate suffix, if they lack one.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH OPTIONS
Without the
.B \-verbose
option,
.B vptovf
operates silently.  With it, a banner and progress report are printed on
.IR stdout .
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR pltotf (1),
.BR tftopl (1),
.BR vftovp (1).
.\"=====================================================================
.SH AUTHORS
Donald E. Knuth wrote the program, based in part on an idea of David Fuchs,
starting with the code for
.BR pltotf (1).
Karl Berry adapted it for compilation with
.BR web2c .
