.TH WEAVE 1 "4 May 1993" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.\"=====================================================================
.if n .ds MF Metafont
.if t .ds MF M\s-2ETAFONT\s0
.if n .ds TX TeX
.if t .ds TX \fRT\\h'-0.1667m'\\v'0.20v'E\\v'-0.20v'\\h'-0.125m'X\fP
.\" the same but obliqued
.el .ds OX TeX\" for nroff
.ie t .ds OX \fIT\v'+0.25m'E\v'-0.25m'X\fP\" for troff
.\" BX definition must follow TX so BX can use TX
.if n .ds BX BibTeX
.if t .ds BX \fRB\s-2IB\s0\fP\*(TX
.\" LX definition must follow TX so LX can use TX
.if n .ds LX LaTeX
.if t .ds LX \fRL\\h'-0.36m'\\v'-0.15v'\s-2A\s0\\h'-0.15m'\\v'0.15v'\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds WB Web
.if t .ds WB W\s-2EB\s0
.\"=====================================================================
.SH NAME
weave \- translate WEB to TeX
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B weave
[
.B \-x
]
.I webfile[.web]
[
.I changefile[.ch]
]
.\"=====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page is not meant to be exhaustive.  The complete
documentation for this version of \*(TX can be found in the info file
or manual
.IR "Web2C: A TeX implementation" .
.PP
The
.B weave
program is used to create a \*(TX file for viewing a \*(WB program.
It takes appropriate care of typographic details like page
layout and the use of indentation, italics, boldface, etc., and it supplies
extensive cross-index information that it gathers automatically.
The command line arguments are the same as for
.B tangle
except for the option:
.B \-x
says to omit the index, module name list, and table of contents pages.
(A
.I CONTENTS.tex
file will still be written when the \*(TX file is processed,
however, unless some macros in
.I webmac.tex
are redefined.)
.PP
The output \*(TX file name is formed by adding
.I .tex
to the root of the \*(WB file name.
.PP
There are several macros
that probably should be redefined by
the programmer at the beginning of the \*(WB file.
It is a good idea to set \\title
to the name of the program.
And, to cause output of only changed modules, one can say
\\let\\maybe=\\iffalse (usually as the first change in the
change file).
.\"=====================================================================
.SH FILES
.TP \w'@@'u+2n
.I $TEXMFMAIN/plain/base/webmac.tex
\*(TX macros used by
.B weave
output.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR tangle (1)
for references, authors, and other information.
