.TH SAPPER 1
.SH NAME
sapper \- time waster
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B games/sapper
[ level ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Sapper is a logic game - you have to uncover mines strewn randomly on
a field. You are told the number of mines that are on the field, and
the time taken.
.PP
The smaller the level the harder the game, the default is level 6, which
is roughtly one mine per six squares of board. Level 1 is all mines.
.PP
You use the mouse buttons to control the game. The
left mouse button uncovers a square on the board. If the square contained
a mine you die. If not the number of mines in adjacent squares is displayed.
If there are no mines in the adjacent squares each of those is uncovered too.
This process repeats.
.PP
When you believe a mine is present in a square you mark
it with the right mouse button, which puts a little flag on the square.
When a square is marked with a flag you cannot accidently uncover it, you
must first unflag it by clicking twice more with the right button.
The intermediate state is a question mark that may be useful, but is not
significant in any other respect from a blank square.
.PP
The middle button will uncover all squares in the three by three grid
centred on the current mouse position.
.PP
The format of the scores files is a series of lines, one per game with the
tab separated fileds being user, level, board size, number of unfound mines,
number of squares uncovered, and time taken. A time of -1 indicates that a
mine was hit on the first move.
.SH FILES
/sys/games/lib/sapper_scores
