.\" $Id: ps2pdf.1,v 1.42 2005/10/20 19:46:55 ray Exp $
.TH PS2PDF 1 "20 October 2005" 8.53 Ghostscript \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH NAME
ps2pdf \- Convert PostScript to PDF using ghostscript
.br
ps2pdf12 \- Convert PostScript to PDF\ 1.2 (Acrobat\ 3-and-later compatible) using ghostscript
.br
ps2pdf13 \- Convert PostScript to PDF\ 1.3 (Acrobat\ 4-and-later compatible) using ghostscript
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBps2pdf\fR  [options...] {input.[e]ps|-} [output.pdf|-]
.br
\fBps2pdf12\fR  [options...] {input.[e]ps|-} [output.pdf|-]
.br
\fBps2pdf13\fR  [options...] {input.[e]ps|-} [output.pdf|-]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B ps2pdf
scripts are work-alikes for nearly all the functionality (but not the
user interface) of Adobe's Acrobat(TM) Distiller(TM) product: they
convert PostScript files to Portable Document Format (PDF) files. 
.PP
The three scripts differ as follows:
.IP -
.B ps2pdf12
will always produce PDF 1.2 output (Acrobat 3-and-later compatible).
.IP -
.B ps2pdf13
will always produce PDF 1.3 output (Acrobat 4-and-later compatible).
.IP -
.B ps2pdf
per se currently produces PDF 1.2 output (Acrobat 3-and-later
compatible). However, this may change in the future. If you care about
the compatibility level of the output, use
.B ps2pdf12
or
.BR ps2pdf13 ,
or use the
.B \-dCompatibility=1.x
switch in the command line.
.PP
There are some limitations in
.BR ps2pdf 's
conversion. See the HTML documentation for more information.
.SH SEE ALSO
gs(1), ps2pdfwr(1),
.br
Ps2pdf.htm in the Ghostscript documentation
.SH VERSION
This document was last revised for Ghostscript version 8.53.
.SH AUTHOR
artofcode LLC and Artifex Software, bug-gs at ghostscript.com, are the
primary maintainers of Ghostscript.
This manpage by George Ferguson.
